Docs/pluggable components (#2875)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/operations/components/pluggable-components/pluggable-components-overview.md

---
type: docs

> title: "Overview"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Pluggable components overview"
```

Author: Do we need to repeat the name "Pluggable components" even being under the section named "Pluggable components"?

I did the same as the Pub/Sub section did

Author: <img width="221" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5839364/194703650-26a4746e-a8f2-431e-bc8f-b1bb65d0383a.png">

how it will look like

Reviewer: Let's change the metadata to be:

>`title: "Pluggable components overview"`
>`linkTitle: "Overview"`

linkTitle: "Overview"
weight: 4500

> description: "Anatomy and supported types"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Overview of pluggable component anatomy and supported component types"
```

Author: Do we need to repeat the name "Pluggable components" even being under the section named "Pluggable components"?

I did the same as the Pub/Sub section did

Reviewer: So I was basing it off of the building block sections... 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/94493363/194883755-eaeb1a09-94db-4c56-9f15-c351cf499c32.png)

But we can remove "pluggable component" and just have:
> "Overview of anatomy and supported component types"

---

> With pluggable components, Dapr can be configured to use components that are not natively supported by the Dapr runtime [(supported Dapr components)]({{<ref "components">}}). These components can leverage existing Dapr building block APIs but are configured differently from community-maintained built-in Dapr components found in the [Components Contrib repository ](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With pluggable components, you can configure Dapr to use components that are not natively supported by the runtime. These components leverage existing Dapr building block APIs, but are configured differently from [community-maintained built-in Dapr components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib).
```

I would add this link as a next step at the bottom of the doc: [(supported Dapr components)]({{<ref "components">}}) Like:

"- Learn more about [natively supported Dapr components]({{<ref "components">}})."

<img src="/images/concepts-building-blocks.png" width=400>

## Pluggable components vs. Built-in components

> Dapr provides two pathways for creating new components -- the pluggable component route, or the same route used to create Built-in components found in Dapr's [Components Contrib repository ](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib). Both options result in components that can leverage Dapr's building block APIs but each have different implementation processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dapr provides two pathways for creating new components:

 - The pluggable component route
 - The built-in components route found in the [components-contrib repository ](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib). 
 
While both component options leverage Dapr's building block APIs, each have different implementation processes.
```

| Component details            | [Built-in Component](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md)  | Pluggable Components                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| ---------------------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | **Language**                 | Can only be written in Go                                                                                  | [Can be written in any gRPC-supported language](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/introduction/#:~:text=Protocol%20buffer%20versions,-While%20protocol%20buffers&text=Proto3%20is%20currently%20available%20in,with%20more%20languages%20in%20development.) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Language**                 | Can only be written in Go                                                                                  | [Can be written in any gRPC-supported language](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/introduction/#:~:text=Protocol%20buffer%20versions,-While%20protocol%20buffers&text=Proto3%20is%20currently%20available%20in,with%20more%20languages%20in%20development) |
```

| **Where it runs**            | As part of the Dapr executable itself                                                                      | As distinct process, container or pod. Runs seperate from Dapr itself                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| **Integration with Dapr**    | Integrated directly into Dapr codebase                                                                     | Integrates with Dapr via Unix Domain Sockets (using gRPC )                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| **Hosting**                  | Hosted in Dapr repository                                                                                  | Hosted in your own repository                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

> | **Distribution**             | Distributed with Dapr release (i.e., new features added to component need to be aligned with Dapr releases | Distributed independently from Dapr itself (i.e., new features can be added _whenever_ and follow your release cycle).                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Distribution**             | Distributed with Dapr release (i.e., new features added to component need to be aligned with Dapr releases | Distributed independently from Dapr itself (i.e., new features can be added _whenever_ and follow your release cycle)                                                                                                                                      |
```

| **How component is started** | Dapr starts component (automatic)                                                                          | User starts component (manual)                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

## When to create a pluggable component

> - There are homegrown components you want to use with Dapr APIs and those homegrown cannot be contributed to the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You have homegrown components you want to use with Dapr APIs that can't be contributed to the project.
```

- You want to keep your component seperate from the Dapr release process.
- You are not as familiar with Go, or implementing your component in Go is not ideal.

## Supported component types

> Pluggable components is a **preview feature**. Currently, only State Stores (type `state`), PubSub (type `pubsub`) and Bindings (type `bindings`) are supported. Read more about [preview features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pluggable components is a **preview feature**. Currently, only the following are supported:

- State stores
- Pub/sub
- Bindings

Read more about [preview features]({{< ref "support-preview-features.md" >}}).
```

Just wondering, should we mention that pluggable components is a preview feature in a note at the top of the doc?

Author: I'm going to add it on the support-preview-features page

> ]({{< ref "support-preview-features.md" >}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

|  Component  |    Type    | gRPC definition  |                       Built-in Reference Implementation                        | Docs                                                                                                                                                                  |
| :---------: | :--------: | :--------------: | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------: | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| State Store |  `state`   |  [state.proto]   |  [Redis](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/state/redis)   | [concept]({{<ref "state-management-overview">}}), [howto]({{<ref "howto-get-save-state">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "state_api">}})                                        |

> |   PubSub    |  `pubsub`  |  [pubsub.proto]  |  [Redis](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/pubsub/redis)  | [concept]({{<ref "pubsub-overview">}}), [howto]({{<ref "howto-publish-subscribe">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "pubsub_api">}})                                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|   Pub/sub    |  `pubsub`  |  [pubsub.proto]  |  [Redis](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/pubsub/redis)  | [concept]({{<ref "pubsub-overview">}}), [howto]({{<ref "howto-publish-subscribe">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "pubsub_api">}})                                              |
```

|  Bindings   | `bindings` | [bindings.proto] | [Kafka](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/bindings/kafka) | [concept]({{<ref "bindings-overview">}}), [input howto]({{<ref "howto-triggers">}}), [output howto]({{<ref "howto-bindings">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "bindings_api">}}) |

## Anatomy of a pluggable component

At high level, a pluggable component is a server that implements and exposes one or more of the gRPC service interfaces defined in the provided [gRPC protobuf files](https://github.com/dapr/dapr/blob/master/dapr/proto/components/v1).

#### Implementing a gRPC service requires three main steps:

> 1. **Find the proto definition file.** Proto definitions are provided for each supported service interface (state store, pubsub, bindings).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Find the proto definition file.** Proto definitions are provided for each supported service interface (state store, pub/sub, bindings).
```

Can we bring lines 53-84 up to sit here? Just to help readers make that connection.

> 2. **Create service scaffolding.** Use [protocol buffers and gRPC tools](https://grpc.io) to create the necessary scaffolding for the service. We recomend for the reader to get acquaited with [gRPC concepts by reading its documentation](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Create service scaffolding.** Use [protocol buffers and gRPC tools](https://grpc.io) to create the necessary scaffolding for the service. You may want to get acquainted with [the gRPC concepts documentation](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/).
```

> 3. **Define the service**. Provide a concrete implementation of the desired service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Define the service.** Provide a concrete implementation of the desired service.
```

> Here's an example of a gRPC service definition file used to create a pluggable component state store ([state.proto]).

Reviewer: Can we move lines 53-84 to sit as part of **1. Find the proto....**? Per comment above.

Reviewer 2: I agree: we should shuffle the proto def to the fist step, move that sentence `"As a first step, protocol buffers tools are used to create the server code for this service."` to the second step. things are a bit out of place...

```protobuf=
// StateStore service provides a gRPC interface for state store components.
service StateStore {
  // Initializes the state store component with the given metadata.
  rpc Init(InitRequest) returns (InitResponse) {}
  // Returns a list of implemented state store features.
  rpc Features(FeaturesRequest) returns (FeaturesResponse) {}
  // Deletes the specified key from the state store.
  rpc Delete(DeleteRequest) returns (DeleteResponse) {}
  // Get data from the given key.
  rpc Get(GetRequest) returns (GetResponse) {}
  // Sets the value of the specified key.
  rpc Set(SetRequest) returns (SetResponse) {}

>   // Ping the state store. Used for liveness porpuses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Ping the state store. Used for liveness purposes.
```

  rpc Ping(PingRequest) returns (PingResponse) {}

  // Deletes many keys at once.
  rpc BulkDelete(BulkDeleteRequest) returns (BulkDeleteResponse) {}
  // Retrieves many keys at once.
  rpc BulkGet(BulkGetRequest) returns (BulkGetResponse) {}
  // Set the value of many keys at once.
  rpc BulkSet(BulkSetRequest) returns (BulkSetResponse) {}
}
```

The interface for the `StateStore` service exposes 9 methods:

> - 2 methods for initialization and components capability advertisement,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 2 methods for initialization and components capability advertisement
```

> - 3 methods for CRUD, healthness or liveness check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 3 methods for CRUD, health-ness, or liveness check
```

> - 3 methods for bulk operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 3 methods for bulk operations
```

> As a first step, protocol buffers tools are used to create the server code for this service. After that, the next step is to define concrete implementations for these 9 methods.

Reviewer: Move this sentence up to **2. Create service scaffolding...**
> Protocol buffers tools are used to create the server code for this service. 

Move this to **3. Define the service...**
> Define concrete implementations for the 9 methods exposed in the `StateStore` interface.

Author: how about now?

> Each component has a service definition for its core functionality. For instance, every pluggable State Store **must** provide a implementation for its `StateStore` service interface. In addition to this core functionality, some components might also expose additional functionality under other **optinal** services. For State Stores, there's also an option to add additional functionality by defining the implementation for a `QueriableStateStore` service and for a `TransactionalStateStore` service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each component has a service definition for its core functionality. For example:

- **State stores**  
    Every pluggable state store **must** provide an implementation for its `StateStore` service interface. In addition to this core functionality, some components might also expose functionality under other **optional** services. You can add extra functionality by defining the implementation for a `QueriableStateStore` service and a `TransactionalStateStore` service.
```

> PubSub components, for instance, only have a single core service interface defined [pubsub.proto]. They have no optional service interface. The same applies for Input Bindings and Output Bindings components: both have a single core service definition on [bindings.proto].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Pub/sub**  
   Pluggable pub/sub components only have a single core service interface defined ([pubsub.proto]). They have no optional service interface.   
- **Bindings**
   Pluggable input and output bindings have a single core service definition on [bindings.proto].
```

### Leveraging multiple building blocks for a component

> In addition to implementing multiple gRPC services from the same component (e.g., `StateStore`, `QueriableStateStore`, `TransactionalStateStore` etc.), a single pluggable component can also expose implementations for other types of components. This means that a single pluggable component can function as a state Store, pubsub, and input or output binding, all at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to implementing multiple gRPC services from the same component (e.g., `StateStore`, `QueriableStateStore`, `TransactionalStateStore` etc.), a single pluggable component can also expose implementations for other component types. This means that a single pluggable component can function as a state store, pub/sub, and input or output binding, all at the same time.
```

> Having multiple building blocks behind the same pluggable component is a path to lower the operational burdern of deploying and operationalizing multiple components. On the other hand, it will make implementing and debugging your component harder. If in doubt, we suggest sticking to a separation of concerns strategy and merging multiple components under the same pluggable component only when striclty needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While exposing multiple building blocks behind the same pluggable component lowers the operational burden of deploying multiple components, it makes implementing and debugging your component harder. If in doubt, stick to a "separation of concerns" strategy by merging multiple components under the same pluggable component only when absolutely necessary.
```

## Operationalizing a pluggable component

> One aspect in which built-in components and pluggable components diverge is in the operational work required to use each of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Built-in components and pluggable components share one thing in common: the operational effort required to use each of them. However, aside from needing to conform to a [component specification]({{<ref "components-concept.md#component-specification">}}), built-in components do not require any extra steps. Dapr starts them automatically.
```

> Aside from providing a [Component specification]({{<ref "components-concept.md#component-specification">}}), built-in components do not require any extra steps to be used and Dapr starts them automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> In contrast, pluggable components require additional steps before they can communicate with Dapr. The component needs first needs to be started before Dapr and facilitate Dapr-Component communication this process is called Service Discovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, pluggable components require additional steps before they can communicate with Dapr. You need to first start the component and facilitate Dapr-Component communication to kick off the Service Discovery process.
```

---
type: docs
title: "Pluggable components overview"

> linkTitle: "Pluggable components overview"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: "Overview"
```

per your suggestion - thanks for catching that!

weight: 4400
description: "Overview of pluggable component anatomy and supported component types"
---

> With pluggable components, you can configure Dapr to use components that are not natively supported by the runtime. These components leverage existing Dapr building block APIs, but are configured differently from [community-maintained built-in Dapr components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Pluggable components are Dapr components. With pluggable components, you can configure Dapr to use components that are not included as part the runtime for example in scenarios where you want to have a private component. These pluggable components leverage the building block APIs, however are registered differently from the built-in Dapr components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib).
```

> Pluggable components are Dapr components. With pluggable components, you can configure Dapr to use components that are not included as part the runtime for example in scenarios where you want to have a private component. These pluggable components leverage the building block APIs, however are registered differently from the [built-in Dapr components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pluggable components are Dapr components that are not included as part the runtime. You can configure Dapr to use components that leverage the building block APIs, but are registered differently from the [built-in Dapr components](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib). For example, you can configure a pluggable component for scenarios where you require a private component. 
```

<img src="/images/concepts-building-blocks.png" width=400>

> ## Pluggable components vs. Built-in components

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Pluggable components vs. built-in components
```

> Dapr provides two pathways for creating new components:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dapr provides two approaches for registering and creating components:
```

> - The pluggable component route

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The built-in components included in the runtime and found in the [components-contrib repository ](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib).
```

> - The built-in components route found in the [components-contrib repository ](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Pluggable components which are deployed and registered independently. 
```

> While both component options leverage Dapr's building block APIs, each have different implementation processes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While both registration options leverage Dapr's building block APIs, each has a different implementation processes.
```

| Component details            | [Built-in Component](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md)  | Pluggable Components                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| ---------------------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | **Language**                 | Can only be written in Go                                                                                  | [Can be written in any gRPC-supported language](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/introduction/#:~:text=Protocol%20buffer%20versions,-While%20protocol%20buffers&text=Proto3%20is%20currently%20available%20in,with%20more%20languages%20in%20development) |

Reviewer 2: Better link to the section than to a `#:~:text` link. 

```suggestion
| **Language**                 | Can only be written in Go                                                                                  | [Can be written in any gRPC-supported language](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/introduction/#protocol-buffer-versions) |
```

> | **Where it runs**            | As part of the Dapr executable itself                                                                      | As distinct process, container or pod. Runs seperate from Dapr itself                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| **Where it runs**            | As part of the Dapr runtime executable                                                                      | As a distinct process or container in a pod. Runs separate from Dapr itself.                                                                                                                                                                                      |
```

> | **Integration with Dapr**    | Integrated directly into Dapr codebase                                                                     | Integrates with Dapr via Unix Domain Sockets (using gRPC )                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| **Registers with Dapr**    | Included into the Dapr codebase                                                                     | Registers with Dapr via Unix Domain Sockets (using gRPC )                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
```

> | **Hosting**                  | Hosted in Dapr repository                                                                                  | Hosted in your own repository                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 3: What does hosting means here? I suggest deleting this, since these are not hosted into a Dapr repository.

Author: @tmacam

Reviewer 2: The idea here was to highlight the difference on code ownership and lifecycle management between built-in components and pluggable ones: . Perhaps "hosting" is the wrong term for it. How about we change this to:

```suggestion
| **Code ownership and management** | Hosted in Dapr repository, subjected to Dapr license, managed by Dapr team                                                                                  | Code hosted in your own repository, licensed under your terms, managed by your team |
```

> | **Distribution**             | Distributed with Dapr release. New features added to component are aligned with Dapr releases | Distributed independently from Dapr itself. New features can be added when needed and follows it's own release cycle.                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Distribution**             | Distributed with Dapr release. New features added to component are aligned with Dapr releases | Distributed independently from Dapr itself. New features can be added when needed and follows its own release cycle.                                                                                                                                 |
```

> | **Distribution**             | Distributed with Dapr release (i.e., new features added to component need to be aligned with Dapr releases | Distributed independently from Dapr itself (i.e., new features can be added _whenever_ and follow your release cycle)                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| **Distribution**             | Distributed with Dapr release. New features added to component are aligned with Dapr releases | Distributed independently from Dapr itself. New features can be added when needed and follows it's own release cycle.                                                                                                                                 |
```

## When to create a pluggable component

- You want to keep your component separate from the Dapr release process.
- You are not as familiar with Go, or implementing your component in Go is not ideal.

> #### Implementing a pluggable component

Reviewer 2: Wrong header level

```suggestion
## Implementing a pluggable component
```

> | **How component is started** | Dapr starts component (automatic)                                                                          | User starts component (manual)                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| **How component is activated** | Dapr starts runs the component (automatic)                                                                          | User starts component (manual)                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
```

> - You have homegrown components you want to use with Dapr APIs that can't be contributed to the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- You have private components you want to use with Dapr APIs that can't be contributed to the project.
```

Author: I do not fully agree with "private" here, I think pluggable components can be public, can we just delete this line instead?

[see this](https://github.com/hypernova3/dapr-ipfs-binding)

Reviewer 2: Same. I was going to ask about this use of private. There is nothing in how pluggable components work that require them to be "private". I understand that we prefer folks contributing built-in ones back to the project/community but this push for private sounds off.

> - You want to keep your component seperate from the Dapr release process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- You want to keep your component separate from the Dapr release process.
```

> #### Implementing a gRPC service requires three main steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Implementing a pluggable component

In order to implement a pluggable component you need to implement a gRPC service in the component. Implementing the gRPC service requires three steps:
```

1. **Find the proto definition file.** Proto definitions are provided for each supported service interface (state store, pub/sub, bindings).

> Pluggable components is a **preview feature**. Currently, only the following are supported:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, the following component APIs are supported:
```

- State stores
- Pub/sub
- Bindings

> Read more about [preview features]({{< ref "support-preview-features.md" >}}).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

| State Store |  `state`   |  [state.proto]   |  [Redis](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/state/redis)   | [concept]({{<ref "state-management-overview">}}), [howto]({{<ref "howto-get-save-state">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "state_api">}})                                        |
|   Pub/sub   |  `pubsub`  |  [pubsub.proto]  |  [Redis](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/pubsub/redis)  | [concept]({{<ref "pubsub-overview">}}), [howto]({{<ref "howto-publish-subscribe">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "pubsub_api">}})                                              |
|  Bindings   | `bindings` | [bindings.proto] | [Kafka](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/bindings/kafka) | [concept]({{<ref "bindings-overview">}}), [input howto]({{<ref "howto-triggers">}}), [output howto]({{<ref "howto-bindings">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "bindings_api">}}) |

2. **Create service scaffolding.** Use the [protocol buffers and gRPC tools](https://grpc.io) to create the scaffolding for the service. You may want to get acquainted with [the gRPC concepts documentation](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/).

> As an example, below is a snippet from the protocol buffer definition file service that defines the gRPC service definition for pluggable component state stores ([state.proto]).

Reviewer 2: I don't think that the proto snippet fits on step 2 at all. We are talking about proto files in step 1, leave it there. If we want to make step 2 more _concrete_ we could add a snipped of a generated class, but I don't think doing so would add much value here.

```suggestion
Here's a snippet of the gRPC service definition for pluggable component state stores ([state.proto]).
```

> As an example, we provide bellow a snippet from the protocol buffer definition file service that defines the gRPC service definition for pluggable component state stores ([state.proto]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, below is a snippet from the protocol buffer definition file service that defines the gRPC service definition for pluggable component state stores ([state.proto]).
```

> 2. **Create service scaffolding.** Use [protocol buffers and gRPC tools](https://grpc.io) to create the necessary scaffolding for the service. You may want to get acquainted with [the gRPC concepts documentation](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. **Create service scaffolding.** Use the [protocol buffers and gRPC tools](https://grpc.io) to create the scaffolding for the service. You may want to get acquainted with [the gRPC concepts documentation](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/).
```

> Here's an example of a gRPC service definition file used to create a pluggable component state store ([state.proto]).

Reviewer 2: It might be only me, but this line reads like _"you could create your own service definition for a state store, and as an example, here is one"_ and that is **not** the case.

```suggestion
As an example, we provide bellow a snippet from the protocol buffer definition file service that defines the gRPC service definition for pluggable component state stores ([state.proto]).
```

```protobuf
// StateStore service provides a gRPC interface for state store components.
service StateStore {
  // Initializes the state store component with the given metadata.
  rpc Init(InitRequest) returns (InitResponse) {}
  // Returns a list of implemented state store features.
  rpc Features(FeaturesRequest) returns (FeaturesResponse) {}
  // Deletes the specified key from the state store.
  rpc Delete(DeleteRequest) returns (DeleteResponse) {}
  // Get data from the given key.
  rpc Get(GetRequest) returns (GetResponse) {}
  // Sets the value of the specified key.
  rpc Set(SetRequest) returns (SetResponse) {}
  // Ping the state store. Used for liveness purposes.

>   rpc Ping(PingRequest) returns (PingResponse) {}

Reviewer 2: Reorder to match the item list bellow

```suggestion
  rpc Features(FeaturesRequest) returns (FeaturesResponse) {}
  // Ping the state store. Used for liveness purposes.
  rpc Ping(PingRequest) returns (PingResponse) {}
  
  // Deletes the specified key from the state store.
  rpc Delete(DeleteRequest) returns (DeleteResponse) {}
  // Get data from the given key.
  rpc Get(GetRequest) returns (GetResponse) {}
  // Sets the value of the specified key.
  rpc Set(SetRequest) returns (SetResponse) {}

```

  // Deletes many keys at once.
  rpc BulkDelete(BulkDeleteRequest) returns (BulkDeleteResponse) {}
  // Retrieves many keys at once.
  rpc BulkGet(BulkGetRequest) returns (BulkGetResponse) {}
  // Set the value of many keys at once.
  rpc BulkSet(BulkSetRequest) returns (BulkSetResponse) {}
}
```

The interface for the `StateStore` service exposes 9 methods:

- 2 methods for initialization and components capability advertisement (Init and Features)
- 1 method for health-ness or liveness check (Ping)
- 3 methods for CRUD (Get, Set, Delete)
- 3 methods for bulk CRUD operations (BulkGet, BulkSet, BulkDelete)

> 

Reviewer 2: Add item 2 back to after the proto snippet and add a bit more content to this owherwise short item.

```suggestion

2. **Create service scaffolding.** Use [protocol buffers and gRPC tools](https://grpc.io) to create the necessary scaffolding for the service. You may want to get acquainted with [the gRPC concepts documentation](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/).

The tools can generate code targeting [any gRPC-supported language](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/introduction/#protocol-buffer-versions). This code will serve as the base for your server and it provide functionality to handle client calls along with infrastructure to decode incoming requests, execute service methods, and encode service responses.

The generated code is not complete. It will be missing concrete implementation for the methods your target service defines, i.e., the core of your pluggable component. This is further explored in the next item. Additionally, you will also have to provide code on how to handle Unix Socket Domain integration, which is Dapr specific, and code handling integration with your downstream services.
```

> The interface for the `StateStore` service exposes 9 methods:

Reviewer 3: The is 8 methods. Did you mean to say 9 methods?

3. **Define the service.** Provide a concrete implementation of the desired service.

> As a first step, protocol buffers tools are used to create the server code for this service. After that, the next step is to define concrete implementations for these 9 methods.

Reviewer 2: I think that at a past version we had a link to protocol buffer tools but IIRC, pointing to grpc.io docs. I providing this context saves from diving more on what we mean by that.

```suggestion
As a first step, [protocol buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview) and [gRPC](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/introduction/) tools are used to create the server code for this service. After that, the next step is to define concrete implementations for these 9 methods.
```

We could also just define a refernce to [gRPC] in this document too and use it instead.

> Each component has a service definition for its core functionality. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each component has a gRPC service definition for its core functionality which is the same as the core component interface. For example:
```

- **State stores**

>   Every pluggable state store **must** provide an implementation for its `StateStore` service interface. In addition to this core functionality, some components might also expose functionality under other **optional** services. You can add extra functionality by defining the implementation for a `QueriableStateStore` service and a `TransactionalStateStore` service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A pluggable state store **must** provide an implementation of the `StateStore` service interface. In addition to this core functionality, some components might also expose functionality under other **optional** services. For example, you can add extra functionality by defining the implementation for a `QueriableStateStore` service and a `TransactionalStateStore` service.
```

- **Pub/sub**

>   Pluggable pub/sub components only have a single core service interface defined ([pubsub.proto]). They have no optional service interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 Pluggable pub/sub components only have a single core service interface defined ([pubsub.proto]). They have no optional service interfaces.
```

> - State stores
> - Pub/sub
> - Bindings
> 
> 
> |  Component  |    Type    | gRPC definition  |                       Built-in Reference Implementation                        | Docs                                                                                                                                                                  |
> | :---------: | :--------: | :--------------: | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------: | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
> | State Store |  `state`   |  [state.proto]   |  [Redis](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/state/redis)   | [concept]({{<ref "state-management-overview">}}), [howto]({{<ref "howto-get-save-state">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "state_api">}})                                        |
> |   Pub/sub   |  `pubsub`  |  [pubsub.proto]  |  [Redis](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/pubsub/redis)  | [concept]({{<ref "pubsub-overview">}}), [howto]({{<ref "howto-publish-subscribe">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "pubsub_api">}})                                              |
> |  Bindings   | `bindings` | [bindings.proto] | [Kafka](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/bindings/kafka) | [concept]({{<ref "bindings-overview">}}), [input howto]({{<ref "howto-triggers">}}), [output howto]({{<ref "howto-bindings">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "bindings_api">}}) |
> 
> 2. **Create service scaffolding.** Use the [protocol buffers and gRPC tools](https://grpc.io) to create the scaffolding for the service. You may want to get acquainted with [the gRPC concepts documentation](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/).
> 
> As an example, below is a snippet from the protocol buffer definition file service that defines the gRPC service definition for pluggable component state stores ([state.proto]).
> 
> ```protobuf
> // StateStore service provides a gRPC interface for state store components.
> service StateStore {
>   // Initializes the state store component with the given metadata.
>   rpc Init(InitRequest) returns (InitResponse) {}
>   // Returns a list of implemented state store features.
>   rpc Features(FeaturesRequest) returns (FeaturesResponse) {}
>   // Deletes the specified key from the state store.
>   rpc Delete(DeleteRequest) returns (DeleteResponse) {}
>   // Get data from the given key.
>   rpc Get(GetRequest) returns (GetResponse) {}
>   // Sets the value of the specified key.
>   rpc Set(SetRequest) returns (SetResponse) {}
>   // Ping the state store. Used for liveness purposes.
>   rpc Ping(PingRequest) returns (PingResponse) {}
> 
>   // Deletes many keys at once.
>   rpc BulkDelete(BulkDeleteRequest) returns (BulkDeleteResponse) {}
>   // Retrieves many keys at once.
>   rpc BulkGet(BulkGetRequest) returns (BulkGetResponse) {}
>   // Set the value of many keys at once.
>   rpc BulkSet(BulkSetRequest) returns (BulkSetResponse) {}
> }
> ```
> 
> The interface for the `StateStore` service exposes 9 methods:
> 
> - 2 methods for initialization and components capability advertisement (Init and Features)
> - 1 method for health-ness or liveness check (Ping)
> - 3 methods for CRUD (Get, Set, Delete)
> - 3 methods for bulk CRUD operations (BulkGet, BulkSet, BulkDelete)
> 
> 3. **Define the service.** Provide a concrete implementation of the desired service.
> 
> As a first step, [protocol buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview) and [gRPC](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/introduction/) tools are used to create the server code for this service. After that, the next step is to define concrete implementations for these 9 methods.
> 
> Each component has a gRPC service definition for its core functionality which is the same as the core component interface. For example:
> 
> - **State stores**
> A pluggable state store **must** provide an implementation of the `StateStore` service interface. In addition to this core functionality, some components might also expose functionality under other **optional** services. For example, you can add extra functionality by defining the implementation for a `QueriableStateStore` service and a `TransactionalStateStore` service.
> 
> - **Pub/sub**
>  Pluggable pub/sub components only have a single core service interface defined ([pubsub.proto]). They have no optional service interfaces.
> - **Bindings**
>  Pluggable input and output bindings have a single core service definition on [bindings.proto]. They have no optional service interfaces.

Reviewer 2: My suggestion for the code change.

Mostly I
* Corrected the header level to 2
* kept the proto buffer sample to sub-item 1
* added a bit more detail to section 2
* provided a more concrete translation of what step 3 means by linking it back to the snippet from step 1. 

```suggestion
## Implementing a pluggable component

In order to implement a pluggable component you need to implement a gRPC service in the component. Implementing the gRPC service requires three steps:

1. **Find the proto definition file.** Proto definitions are provided for each supported service interface (state store, pub/sub, bindings).

Currently, the following component APIs are supported:

- State stores
- Pub/sub
- Bindings

|  Component  |    Type    | gRPC definition  |                       Built-in Reference Implementation                        | Docs                                                                                                                                                                  |
| :---------: | :--------: | :--------------: | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------: | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| State Store |  `state`   |  [state.proto]   |  [Redis](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/state/redis)   | [concept]({{<ref "state-management-overview">}}), [howto]({{<ref "howto-get-save-state">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "state_api">}})                                        |
|   Pub/sub   |  `pubsub`  |  [pubsub.proto]  |  [Redis](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/pubsub/redis)  | [concept]({{<ref "pubsub-overview">}}), [howto]({{<ref "howto-publish-subscribe">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "pubsub_api">}})                                              |
|  Bindings   | `bindings` | [bindings.proto] | [Kafka](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/bindings/kafka) | [concept]({{<ref "bindings-overview">}}), [input howto]({{<ref "howto-triggers">}}), [output howto]({{<ref "howto-bindings">}}), [api spec]({{<ref "bindings_api">}}) |

Here's a snippet of the gRPC service definition for pluggable component state stores ([state.proto]).

```protobuf
// StateStore service provides a gRPC interface for state store components.
service StateStore {
  // Initializes the state store component with the given metadata.
  rpc Init(InitRequest) returns (InitResponse) {}
  // Returns a list of implemented state store features.
  rpc Features(FeaturesRequest) returns (FeaturesResponse) {}
  // Ping the state store. Used for liveness purposes.
  rpc Ping(PingRequest) returns (PingResponse) {}

  // Deletes the specified key from the state store.
  rpc Delete(DeleteRequest) returns (DeleteResponse) {}
  // Get data from the given key.
  rpc Get(GetRequest) returns (GetResponse) {}
  // Sets the value of the specified key.
  rpc Set(SetRequest) returns (SetResponse) {}

  // Deletes many keys at once.
  rpc BulkDelete(BulkDeleteRequest) returns (BulkDeleteResponse) {}
  // Retrieves many keys at once.
  rpc BulkGet(BulkGetRequest) returns (BulkGetResponse) {}
  // Set the value of many keys at once.
  rpc BulkSet(BulkSetRequest) returns (BulkSetResponse) {}
}
```

The interface for the `StateStore` service exposes 9 methods:

- 2 methods for initialization and components capability advertisement (Init and Features)
- 1 method for health-ness or liveness check (Ping)
- 3 methods for CRUD (Get, Set, Delete)
- 3 methods for bulk CRUD operations (BulkGet, BulkSet, BulkDelete)

2. **Create service scaffolding.** Use [protocol buffers and gRPC tools](https://grpc.io) to create the necessary scaffolding for the service. You may want to get acquainted with [the gRPC concepts documentation](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/).

The tools can generated code targeting [any gRPC-supported language](https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/introduction/#protocol-buffer-versions). This code will serve as the base for your server and it provide functionality to handle client calls along with infrastructure to decode incoming requests, execute service methods, and encode service responses.

The generated code will is not complete. It will be missing definitions on how to handle Unix Socket Domain integration, integration with your downstream services and, more importantly, concrete code for the methods your target service define.

3. **Define the service.** Provide a concrete implementation of the desired service.

Each component has a service definition for its core functionality. For example:

- **State stores**
A pluggable state store **must** provide an implementation of the `StateStore` service interface. In addition to this core functionality, some components might also expose functionality under other **optional** services. For example, you can add extra functionality by defining the implementation for a `QueriableStateStore` service and a `TransactionalStateStore` service.

- **Pub/sub**
 Pluggable pub/sub components only have a single core service interface defined ([pubsub.proto]). They have no optional service interfaces.
- **Bindings**
 Pluggable input and output bindings have a single core service definition on [bindings.proto]. They have no optional service interfaces.

Following the State Store example from step 1, after using generating its service scaffolding code using gRPC and protocol buffers tools (step 2), 
the next step is to define concrete implementations for the 9 methods defined under `service StateStore`, along with code to initialize and communicate with your dependencies.
That concrete implementation and auxiliary code are the core of your pluggable component: they define how your component behaves when handling gRPC requests from Dapr.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Close item 3 with a concrete example of what this step means.

```suggestion

Following the State Store example from step 1, after generating its service scaffolding code using gRPC and protocol buffers tools (step 2), 
the next step is to define concrete implementations for the 9 methods defined under `service StateStore`, along with code to initialize and communicate with your dependencies.
This concrete implementation and auxiliary code are the core of your pluggable component: they define how your component behaves when handling gRPC requests from Dapr.

```

>   Pluggable input and output bindings have a single core service definition on [bindings.proto].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 Pluggable input and output bindings have a single core service definition on [bindings.proto]. They have no optional service interfaces.
```

### Leveraging multiple building blocks for a component

> In addition to implementing multiple gRPC services from the same component (e.g., `StateStore`, `QueriableStateStore`, `TransactionalStateStore` etc.), a single pluggable component can also expose implementations for other component types. This means that a single pluggable component can function as a state store, pub/sub, and input or output binding, all at the same time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to implementing multiple gRPC services from the same component (for example `StateStore`, `QueriableStateStore`, `TransactionalStateStore` etc.), a pluggable component can also expose implementations for other component interfaces. This means that a single pluggable component can function as a state store, pub/sub, and input or output binding, all at the same time. In other words you can implement multiple component interfaces into a pluggable component and exposes these as gRPC services.
```

> While exposing multiple building blocks behind the same pluggable component lowers the operational burden of deploying multiple components, it makes implementing and debugging your component harder. If in doubt, stick to a "separation of concerns" strategy by merging multiple components under the same pluggable component only when absolutely necessary.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While exposing multiple component interfaces on the same pluggable component lowers the operational burden of deploying multiple components, it makes implementing and debugging your component harder. If in doubt, stick to a "separation of concerns" by merging multiple components interfaces into the same pluggable component only when necessary.
```

## Operationalizing a pluggable component

> Built-in components and pluggable components share one thing in common: the operational effort required to use each of them. However, aside from needing to conform to a [component specification]({{<ref "components-concept.md#component-specification">}}), built-in components do not require any extra steps. Dapr starts them automatically.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Built-in components and pluggable components share one thing in common: the operational effort required to use each of them. However, aside from needing to conform to a [component specification]({{<ref "components-concept.md#component-specification">}}), built-in components do not require any extra steps. Dapr runs them automatically.
```

> Built-in components and pluggable components share one thing in common: the operational effort required to use each of them. However, aside from needing to conform to a [component specification]({{<ref "components-concept.md#component-specification">}}), built-in components do not require any extra steps. Dapr starts them automatically.

Reviewer 2: > Built-in components and pluggable components share one thing in common: the operational effort required to use each of them.

Sorry, but this is not true either a technical or practical point of view. The next page, Discovery, talk about all the extra operational work one has to do before Dapr can use a pluggable component. What they do share is the need for you to provide a component specification.

```suggestion
Built-in components and pluggable components share one thing in common: both need a [component specification]({{<ref "components-concept.md#component-specification">}}). Built-in components do not require any extra steps to be used: Dapr is ready to use them automatically.
```

> In contrast, pluggable components require additional steps before they can communicate with Dapr. You need to first start the component and facilitate Dapr-Component communication to kick off the Service Discovery process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In contrast, pluggable components require additional steps before they can communicate with Dapr. You need to first run the component and facilitate Dapr-component communication to kick off the registration process.
```

## Next steps

> - [Pluggable Component Service Discovery]({{<ref "pluggable-components-discovery">}})

Reviewer 3: Suggest calling this "register" instead of discovery

> - [Pluggable Component Service Discovery]({{<ref "pluggable-components-discovery">}})

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Pluggable component registration]({{<ref "pluggable-components-discovery">}})
```
